---
slug: engage-2025
date: 2025-05-18
categories: 
  - Conferences
tags:
  - Conferences
  - Volt MX Go
  - Community
  - CSS
  - HTML
  - Web
comments: true
---
This week, once again, I will be speaking at Engage in Den Haag. As usual, it promises to be a great conference. And as usual, I will be busy.

## Wo4 Volt MX and Volt MX Go Workshop, Monday 19th May 13:30, Room 1.10w

Once again we have a workshop on Volt MX and Volt MX Go. Later this year, VoltScript will GA in Volt MX Go. The stats surrounding the work are not inconsiderable: 

- four Early Access Releases across 18 months
- comprising development runtimes for **three** different platforms (Windows, Linux, and now Mac Silicon)
- **eleven** different VoltScript Extensions on Volt MX Marketplace
- **five** open-sourced VoltScript Library Modules
- an open-sourced reository of samples
- VoltScript Interface Designer, a tool to help architect VSEs and VSLMs
- extensive documentation which will also be open-sourced at GA
- plus videos coming soon

One of the key messages I'll be highlighting this year is that VoltScript is just one tool in an extensive toolbag of micro-functions. The skill is understanding what's available and avoiding the instinctive approach of doing everything in script. We will also show how much can be achieved to create a delightful user experience.

## De10 Get To Know Your Developer Community, Wednesday 21st May 10:15, Room 1.10 F

On Wednesday Maria Nordin and I will deliver a session diving deep into the HCLSoftware Digital Solutions Community. With only 45 minutes, there's no time to cover all the powerful functionality provided by the product and the customisations / extensions (both from the Discourse community and self-developed). But we hope to give enough information to enable you to orient yourself, maximise your personalisation of the site, and know where to go for more.

And look out for content to help promote the site.

## Em03 Engage Supreme-Pro-Code-Mode: More Web Awesomeness Without Frameworks, Wednesday 21st May 13:30, Room 1.09 E

Later that day, Stephan Wissel and I will be delivering another session on what can be done with web standards alone. The interesting aspect is that last year, I was very much guided by Stephan on what we should cover. But this year, thanks to the personal investigation I've undertaken over the last year, I've been able to suggest much more of the content. The web development landscape has evolved significantly and continues to do so. Learning standards has always been a good thing, not only for future-proofing your skills but also for understanding how frameworks achieve what they achieve, and to know if a given framework is looking to stay modern or use out-dated workarounds.

Of course I will also be around throughout the conference and I look forward to catching up with old friends and new.
